
Abstract 
Our environment is crowded with objects that potentially need further scrutiny, and on many occasions attending to the task relevant features of the environment is an essential prerequisite for effective functioning.  On the other hand, attention is a finite resource, and therefore must be deployed in a selective manner. Hence, people use various directional cues to focus their attention to important events and objects in the world. These directional cues can be symbolic, such as pointing arrows or words with directional meaning. Humans—as highly social creatures—often rely also on social cues to guide their attentional resources such as gaze direction, head orientation or pointing gestures. The purpose of this study will be to determine whether attentional focus is modulated by an anxious or depressive personality trades in the context of social and symbolic cueing, thus providing insight into how people experience and navigate in their social world. In order to do this, we will organize a study, using a variation of the gaze cueing task in which the cueing stimuli (social – gazing face or symbolic – an arrow), presented centrally is entirely irrelevant and therefor can be easily ignored by the participants. Additionally, we will use Beck Depression Inventory - II (BDI-II) and The Social Phobia Inventory (SoPhI) (Moore &amp; Gee, 2003) to measure the individual characteristic and traits. 

 
Introduction

Simbolyc vs. social cues 
The study of gaze cueing, particularly in comparison with arrow cues, reveals intricate dynamics between perceptual and attentional systems in processing social and symbolic cues. This vast area of research, has its roots in the early investigation of gaze-cueing (GC) automaticity, and is now significantly expanded, especially in comparing the attentional shifts triggered by symbolic and social cues.
Hermens, for example, found that gaze cueing had a weaker effect than arrows and hands in both adults and children when the cue was not at the fixation point (Hermens, 2018) (GazeArrowsHands). Burton, Bindemann, Langton, Schweinberger, and Jenkins (2009) observed that rotated heads and pointing hands interfered with responses to gazing eyes, but gazing eyes did not similarly interfere with responses to other cues. These findings are supported by a neuroimaging study by Hietanen, Nummenmaa, Nyman, Parkkola, & Ha¨ma¨la¨inen (2006), which showed that gaze- and arrow-cued attentional orienting are subserved by different neural networks, with arrow cues engaging the voluntary attention network more. 
Another branch of neuroimaging studies also demonstrated those differences in the information processing in participants with disconnected hemispheres. Those studies found that shifts of attention to eye gaze primarily involve activation in the hemisphere specialized for face processing (right hemisphere) in comparison with arrows, which triggered activation bilaterally, underscoring the special nature of gaze cues in our cognitive processing (Kingstone et al. (2000) and Ristic et al. (2002)).
Recent studies have delved deeper into these dynamics, reporting that the GCE is maximized when group members uniformly direct their gaze. With the introduction of inconsistent cues (faces looking into the opposite direction), the GCE was reduced, supporting the notion that when individuals are exposed to multiple cueing faces, they tend to follow a kind of “majority rule.” (Sun, Yu, Zhou, and Shen (2017)). A “quorum-like” order in small groups, was observed, where the proportion of consistent facial cues needed to elicit an attentional response increases with group size (Capozzi, Ristic, and Bayliss (2018)). 
It has been suggested that another important difference may reside in how people select objects in response to these two types of cues, eye-gaze eliciting a more specific attentional orientation than arrows. (Recently, a study by Marotta, Lupiáñez, Martella, and Casagrande, 2012  https://doi.org/10.1037/a0023959). In particular, in their study the authors hypothesized that “biologically and socially relevant gaze cues may encourage more specific attentional orienting, compared to arrow cues, since a specific intention may be automatically attributed to gaze and not to arrows”. Aligned with their hypothesis, it was observed that eye-gaze cues focus attention precisely on a specific location or part of an object, whereas arrow cues result in attention being distributed over the entire object being indicated.
More resent research target placeholders were either grouped based on e gestalt’s law of proximity or not. This study revealed that arrows disperse attention across a group of objects, whereas eye-gaze narrows attention to a specific target. This effect was not seen when placeholders were ungrouped or absent. (Jeanette et al. 2023) https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0280955
Taken together, these results support the notion that gaze cues lead to more precise attentional orientation than arrows, and that gaze is more likely to modulate the attentional shift when an object is present in the environment and can be interpreted as the goal of the gaze, underling the stronger social aspect and higher rates of specificity of the gaze cues. 


Social cueing (gaze) modulation

Although the distinction between gaze and arrow cues in guiding attention is well-recognized, the specific factors that modulate the Gaze Cueing Effect (GCE) remain less certain. Despite the topic's popularity and the substantial research conducted, findings have been inconsistent, with a notable lack of replicability in the data. This ambiguity highlights the need for further investigation to clarify the elements influencing GCE.
The GCE is shaped by a complex array of influences that span individual psychological characteristics, situational variables, and broader social and cognitive contexts. These influencing factors can be broadly categorized into several key groups: impact the GCE. major sections focusing on (a) characteristics of the observer, (b) characteristics of cueing faces, and (c) their relationship (Dalmasso, 2018). Each of these categories encompasses a range of elements that collectively contribute to the nuanced ways in which gaze cues are processed and acted upon. This complexity is a significant contributor to the mixed data prevalent in the field and underlines the challenge of isolating and identifying the precise mechanisms at play in gaze cueing, that leads to the mixed and sometimes contradictory results observed across different studies. 

Evidence indicates that higher dominance, social status, and potentially trustworthiness can elicit a greater orienting response, reflecting the social relevance associated with these attributes (Koski, Xie, & Olson, 2015 as cited in Dalmasso, 2018). Physical dominance, closely linked to the concept of hierarchy and defined as the use of force and intimidation to influence others (Henrich & Gil-White, 2001 as cited in Dalmasso, 2018), is often associated with masculinity. Masculine faces are typically perceived as more dominant compared to feminine faces (Perrett et al., 1998 as cited in Dalmasso, 2018). Studies have used masculinized and feminized faces to demonstrate that masculinized faces elicit a stronger GCE, particularly at shorter SOAs (Jones et al., 2010) Further research confirmed that dominant-looking male faces induced a stronger GCE compared to nondominant female faces. The study also revealed that the nondominant female face induced a reliable GCE only when paired with nonthreatening images, suggesting that in threatening contexts, physically weaker individuals are perceived as less capable of offering safety. (Ohlsen, van Zoest, and van Vugt, 2013 as cited in Dalmasso, 2018). Social status, often derived from intellectual abilities and respect from others (Gould, 2002), also influences the GCE. Dalmaso, Pavan, Castelli, and Galfano (2012) found that faces associated with higher social status elicited a greater GCE. This effect, as further shown by Dalmaso et al. (2014), tends to decay over time; with a longer SOA, the magnitude of the GCE was not affected by the social status of the gaze cue provider. These findings suggest that the influence of social status on GCE is reflexive and early-rising (Dalmasso, 2014). In relation to trustworthiness, the results are somewhat unclear. While Süßenbach and Schönbrodt (2014) reported a greater GCE in response to faces deemed trustworthy, other studies have found no such modulation (Bayliss & Tipper, 2006; King, Rowe, & Leonards, 2011; Strachan, Kirkham, Manssuer, Over, & Tipper 2017 as cited in Dalmasso, 2018). 

Facial expressions, when combined with gaze direction, are crucial in social communication, indicating the presence of relevant objects or threats. Studies on the GCE in response to facial expressions, especially static ones, have produced mixed results. Several studies (Hietanen & Leppänen, 2003; Bayliss et al., 2007; Borjon et al., 2010; Galfano et al., 2011; Holmes et al., 2010; Prasad et al., 2015; Slessor et al., 2008) found no modulation of the GCE by emotional expressions.

In contrast, certain studies identified modulatory effects under specific conditions. For instance, Hori et al. (2005) and Hudson, Nijboer, and Jellema (2012) reported a greater GCE for happy faces, particularly from female actors or in low AQ individuals. Pecchinenda and Petrucci (2016) and Tollenaar et al. (2013) observed increased GCE in response to angry, happy, and fearful faces under high cognitive load or post-oxytocin administration. Dynamic stimuli, like morphing faces, have also shown greater GCE responses to fearful or angry faces (Bayless et al., 2011; Graham et al., 2010; Lassalle & Itier, 2013, 2015b; Liu et al., 2019; McCrackin & Itier, 2018; Neath et al., 2013; Putman et al., 2006; Tipples, 2006; Uono et al., 2009), though not consistently (Fichtenholtz et al., 2007, 2009).

Further, individual differences significantly influence the GCE. Mathews, Fox, Yiend, and Calder (2003) found a greater GCE in response to fearful faces in high-anxious individuals, a finding not consistently replicated in other studies (Galfano et al., 2011; Holmes et al., 2010; McCrackin & Itier, 2019). Tipples (2006), Pletti, Dalmaso, Sarlo, and Galfano (2015), and Lassalle and Itier (2015a; McCrackin & Itier, 2019) also reported variations in the GCE related to fear, disgust, anger, and high AQ scores. Additionally, the salience of affective information and frequency of exposure to emotional expressions can shape the GCE (Pecchinenda et al., 2008; Bayliss et al., 2010; Friesen et al., 2011; Kuhn et al., 2016a). Overt attention paradigms like instructed saccade paradigms have yielded mixed results (Bonifacci et al., 2008; Matsunaka & Hiraki, 2019).


Individual differences in the perceiver’s own personality can also shape their social attention abilities. Bayliss, di Pellegrino, and Tipper (2005) explored this by presenting male and female participants with both male and female cueing faces, manipulating the SOA. Their study found that the GCE was stronger in females across all SOAs, with a slightly more pronounced effect at the longest SOA. Interestingly, they also discovered that using nonpredictive arrows as cues, instead of eyes, revealed a significant gender difference in attention orientation, suggesting that the attention systems of males and females process noninformative symbolic cues differently. This finding aligns with Baron-Cohen's (2002) "extreme male brain" theory of autism, suggesting that males may exhibit more autistic-like traits and, consequently, reduced social abilities compared to females. This theory has implications for the Gaze Cueing Effect (GCE).
Bayliss, A. P., di Pellegrino, G., & Tipper, S. P. (2005). Sex differences in
eye gaze and symbolic cueing of attention. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 58, 631–650.
Bayliss, A. P., Frischen, A., Fenske, M. J., 
Individual personality characteristic as low levels of self-esteem were linked to higher GCE (Wu, Bischof, Anderson, Jakobsen, & Kingstone, 2014)., explained by the need of those individuals to be reconnected with the others (e.g., Baumeister & Leary, 1995).

Familiar faces, such as those of colleagues from the same department, elicited a stronger GCE compared to faces of individuals from different departments, especially in female participants, suggesting that they have a heightened sensitivity to eye-gaze cues (Bayliss et al., 2005) 

Introversion/extroversion traits in combination with emotional expression also influence the GCE in a way that introverts showed a reliable GCE in response to neutral and happy faces but not angry faces, whereas extroverts showed the opposite pattern (Ponari, Trojano, Grossi, and Conson, 2013).

The Gaze Cueing Effect (GCE) is influenced not only by stable personality traits but also by temporary internal states. Feelings of social acceptance or rejection prior to the GCE task can modulate the GC effect, underscoring the impact of temporary emotional states on attentional processes. (Wilkowski et al., 2009). Similarly, Cui, Zhang, and Geng (2014) reported similar results for role of perceived when participants were primed with high or low power scenarios. Higher GCE suggested that such priming can alter gaze cueing responses, thus suggesting that the GCE is sensitive to changes in perceived social hierarchy (Similarly, Cui, Zhang, and Geng, 2014). In contrast, Capellini, Riva, Ricciardelli, and Sacchi (2019) investigated the effect of a temporarily induced state of belongingness on the GCE by using a gaze-cueing task and cyberball task. Their findings suggested that such manipulation influenced the GCE, but in a direction opposite to what was reported by Wilkowski et al. (2009). 
